# Ed25519 Signature Scheme

Ed25519 is a conservatively designed yet highly efficient digital signature scheme specified in [RFC 8032](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8032). It uses a Twisted Edwards (TED) curve known as Edwards25519 and does not require the generation of a uniformly-distributed (pseudo-)random number for signing a message. A major benefit of Ed25519 compared to ECDSA based on NIST curves is its robustness against subtle implementation flaws and accidental API misuse. Thanks to the TED curve and the underlying pseudo-Mersenne prime field, Ed25519 is also easier to protect against side-channel attacks, especially timing attacks. Ed25519 has enjoyed growing popularity over the past 10 years and is nowadays supported by a wide range of cryptographic libraries, among which [LibSodium](https://doc.libsodium.org) and [Lib25519](https://lib25519.cr.yp.to) are probably the most well-known examples in C.

From a high-level perspective, the Ed25519 signature scheme consists of the following three functions: (i) a function to generate a key-pair, (ii) a function to compute a signature of a message using the key-pair, and (iii) a function to verify a signature using the signer's public key. Micro25519 provides these three functions in essentially the same way as the "[detached version](https://doc.libsodium.org/public-key_cryptography/public-key_signatures#detached-mode)" of the LibSodium API for Ed25519, which means the signature is stored in a separate byte-array of length 64 and not attached to a copy of the original message. The functions for signature generation/verification of Lib25519 are slightly different but can be emulated through a simple wrapper. Apart from the three main functions, Micro25519 also comes with some auxiliary functions that are useful for the Ed25519 signature scheme, e.g., functions to compress and decompress a public key and functions to perform arithmetic operations modulo the group order $\ell$.

RFC 8032 specifies three variants of the Ed25519 signature scheme: (i) the original Ed25519 as introduced by the designers, (ii) a "pre-hash" variant called Ed25519ph, and (iii) a "context" variant referred to as Ed25519ctx. The original Ed25519 inherits the collision-resilience property of classical Schnorr signatures but requires to hash the message twice, once to generate the secret scalar and then another time to obtain the integer $k$ from which the second part of the signature is computed. On the other hand, the Ed25519ph variant operates on a hash of the message and not the message itself, which avoids this double hashing of the message, but has the disadvantage that the collision-resistance of the signature scheme depends solely on the collision-resistance of the hash function. Although Ed25519ph can handle large messages more efficiently, it is, in fact, rarely used in practice. Therefore, Micro25519 only supports the original variant of Ed25519.

Like any other signature scheme, EdDSA requires a hash function to generate/verify a signature of a message, which is SHA-512 for Ed25519. The X25519 implementation contained in Micro25519 also uses SHA-512 for such tasks as the generation of pseudo-random numbers from a long-term secret and the computation of a secret key suitable for symmetric crypotsystems from a shared X25519 secret. Micro25519 supports SHA-512 through two APIs, a low-level API consisting of three functions following the _Init-Update-Final_ model, and a high-level API with a single function that computes the digest in one go. This high-level function is simply a wrapper around the low-level functions. The low-level API is useful for constrained devices as it allows for an incremental hashing of large messages in small(er) parts, without having to store the entire message in RAM. All functions for SHA-512 are described in [x25519.md](./x25519.md).


### Data structures

Most inputs and outputs of the functions provided by the Ed25519 API are _byte-arrays_, i.e., arrays of type `unsigned char`. For brevity, Micro25519 defines the data type `Byte` as alternative for `unsigned char`. A private key consists of 32 (pseudo-)random bytes, and a public key is nothing else than a point on the Edwards25519 curve, which is usually compressed (i.e., composed of the $y$-coordinate and one bit of the $x$-coordinate). Multi-Precision Integers (MPIs) and elements of the underlying prime field GF($p$), such as coordinates, are stored in arrays of type `Word` (i.e., arrays of type `uint32_t`), whereby the latter have a fixed length of 8 for Edwards25519 (see [mpiarith.md](./mpiarith.md) and [gfparith.md](./gfparith.md)). A decompressed point is represented through the C structure `Point`, which is described in [tedcurve.md](./tedcurve.md). Internally, the Ed25519 functions also use the C structures `ECDomPar` to access the domain parameters and pre-computed constants needed for Ed25519 (see [tedcurve.md](./tedcurve.md)).


### Exponentiation of a field-element to the power of $(p-5)/8$: $r = a^{(p-5)/8} \bmod p$

```
void gfp_exp_p58(Word *r, const Word *a);
```

This function raises a field-element to the power of $(p-5)/8$ modulo $p$, whereby the result (i.e., the modular power) may not be fully reduced. However, the result is always in the range $[0, 2p-1]$.

The word-array `r` for the result must be able to accommodate eight words.


### Compression (encoding) of a point

```
void ted_compress(Word *r, const Point *a);
```

This function converts a point in conventional affine coordinates to its compressed representation consisting of the $y$-coordinate and the least-significant bit of the $x$-coordinate. The result (i.e., the compressed point) is an MPI consisting of eight words, whereby the least-significant bit of the $x$-coordinate is stored at the most-significant position of the last word.

The word-array `r` for the result must be able to accommodate eight words.


### Deompression (decoding) of a point

```
int ted_decompress(Point *r, const Word *a, const ECDomPar *d);
```

This function converts a point in compressed representation consisting of the $y$-coordinate and the least-significant bit of the $x$-coordinate to a point in conventional affine coordinates. The array `a` containing the compressed point must have a length of eight words, whereby the least-significant bit of the $x$-coordinate is stored at the most-significant position of the last word. The parameter `d` is needed to access a pre-computed constant for decompression.

Note that `r->dim` must be (at least) 2. The return value is `0` if the decompression succeeded and `ERR_DECOMPRESSION` otherwise (e.g., the $y$-coordinate is not smaller than $p$ or $(y^2 - 1)/(d y^2 + 1)$ is not a square in GF($p$)).


### Projective point subtraction: $R = R - P$

```
void ted_sub(Point *r, const Point *a);
```

This function subtracts a point in projective $[X:Y:Z]$ coordinates from a point in extended projective $[X:Y:Z:E:H]$ coordinates.

Note that `r->dim` must be 6 since the function uses the sixth coordinate of `r` to store an intermediate result of the point subtraction (the first five coordinates contain $X$, $Y$, $Z$, $E$, and $H$, respectively). The point `p` must have a dimension of (at least) 3.


### Double-scalar multiplication: $R = l \cdot G - k \cdot P$

```
int ted_mul_dblbase(Point *r, const Word *l, const Word *k, const Point *p, const ECDomPar *d);
```

This function computes a double-scalar multiplication $R = l \cdot G - k \cdot P$, including a validation of inputs and the result. The base point $P$ must be given in affine coordinates and must not have a low order (i.e., $\mathrm{ord}(P) > 8$). The arrays `l` and `k` containing the scalars must have a length of eight words. Note that the computation of $R = l \cdot G - k \cdot P$ is actually composed of a fixed-base scalar multiplication $l \cdot G$, a variable-base scalar multiplication $k \cdot P$ (on the birationally-equivalent Curve25519) and a subtraction of the latter from the former. The parameter `d` is needed to access a pre-computed constant for the mapping of points from the TED model to the Montgomery model and vice versa.

The result $R$ is represented in affine coordinates. The return value is `0` when all inputs and the result are valid and non-0 otherwise. Possible non-0 return values are `ERR_INVALID_SCALAR` (when either $l = 0$ or $k = 0$) and `ERR_INVALID_POINT` (when $P$ has low order or $R$ is the neutral element).


### Addition of two MPIs modulo the group-order: $r = a + b \bmod \ell$

```
void ed25519_add_order(Word *r, const Word *a, const ECDomPar *d);
```

This function adds two MPIs of length 8 modulo the group-order $\ell$, whereby the result (i.e., the modular sum) is, in general, not fully reduced. However, the result is always in the range $[0, 2^{256}-1]$ and fits into an MPI of length 8. The parameter `d` is needed to access the group-order $\ell$.

The word-array `r` for the result must be able to accommodate eight words.


### Reduction of a double-length MPI modulo the group-order: $r = a \bmod \ell$

```
void ed25519_mod_order(Word *r, const Word *a, const ECDomPar *d);
```

This function reduces an MPI of length 16 (e.g., a SHA-512 digest or a product of two MPIs of length 8) modulo the group-order $\ell$, whereby the result (i.e., the residue) is, in general, not fully reduced. However, the result is always in the range $[0, 2^{256}-1]$ and fits into an MPI of length 8. The parameter `d` is needed to access the group-order $\ell$ and a pre-computed constant for Barrett reduction.

The word-array `r` for the result must be able to accommodate eight words.


### Full reduction of an MPI modulo the group-order: $r = a \bmod \ell$

```
void ed25519_fred_order(Word *r, const Word *a, const ECDomPar *d);
```

This function computes the least non-negative residue of an MPI of length 8 modulo the group-order $\ell$. The result (i.e., the residue) is always fully reduced, i.e., in the range $[0, \ell-1]$. The parameter `d` is needed to access the group-order $\ell$.

The word-array `r` for the result must be able to accommodate eight words.


### Generation of an Ed25519 key-pair

```
int ed25519_gen_keypair(Byte *keypair);
```

This function generates a key-pair for Ed25519 consisting of a private key and a public key, each having a length of 32 bytes. The private key consists of 32 (pseudo-)random bytes, which are generated using `x25519_rand_bytes` (see [x25519.md](./x25519.md)). Note that, unlike an X25519 private key, a private key for Ed25519 is not a scalar. Instead, a scalar $l$ is obtained by first computing the SHA-512 digest of the private key and then "pruning" the lower 32 bytes of this digest, as described in Section 5.1.5 of RFC 8032. The public key is a compressed point $A$ on Edwards25519, which is the result of a fixed-base scalar multiplication of $l$ by the generator $G$ of Edwards25519 (i.e., $A = l \cdot G$).

The key-pair has a length of 64 bytes and is composed of two parts: (i) a private key $a$ consisting of 32 (pseudo-)random bytes, and (ii) a public-key in the form of a compressed point $A$ on Edwards25519. The byte-array `keypair` for the key-pair must be able to accommodate 64 bytes. Each part is stored in little-Endian format. The return value is `0` when the key-pair generation succeeded, and non-0 otherwise. Possible non-0 return values are `ERR_RAND_BYTE_GEN` (when the generation of random bytes failed) and `ERR_INVALID_POINT` (when $R$ is the neutral element).


### Computation of an Ed25519 signature

```
int ed25519_sign(Byte *signature, const Byte *message, size_t mlen, const Byte *keypair);
```

This function computes a signature of a message of `mlen` bytes using the signer's key-pair. The key-pair has a length of 64 bytes and is composed of two parts: (i) a private key $a$ consisting of 32 (pseudo-)random bytes, and (ii) a public-key in the form of a compressed point $A$ on Edwards25519. Each part of the key-pair is given in little-Endian format.

The signature has a length of 64 bytes and is composed of two parts: (i) a compressed point $R$ on Edwards25519, and (ii) an MPI $s$ in the range $[0, \ell-1]$, where $\ell$ is the group-order. The byte-array `signature` for the signature must be able to accommodate 64 bytes. Each part is stored in little-Endian format. The return value is `0` when the signature generation succeeded, and `ERR_INVALID_POINT` when $R$ is the neutral element.


### Verification of an Ed25519 signature

```
int ed25519_verify(const Byte *signature, const Byte *message, size_t mlen, const Byte *pubkey);
```

This function verifies the signature of a message of `mlen` bytes using the signer's public key in compressed representation. The signature has a length of 64 bytes and is composed of two parts: (i) a compressed point $R$ on Edwards25519, and (ii) an MPI $s$ in the range $[0, \ell-1]$, where $\ell$ is the group-order. Each part of the signature and also the signer's public key, which has a length of 32 bytes, is given in little-Endian format.

The return value is `0` when the signature is valid, and non-0 otherwise. Possible non-0 return values are `ERR_DECOMPRESSION` (when the public key could not be decompressed) and `ERR_INVALID_SIGNATURE` (when the verification failed for some other reason).


### Fast verification of an Ed25519 signature (using the signer's decompressed public key)

```
int ed25519_verify_fast(const Byte *signature, const Byte *message, size_t mlen, const Point *pubkey);
```

This function verifies the signature of a message of `mlen` bytes using the signer's public key in decompressed representation. The signature has a length of 64 bytes and is composed of two parts: (i) a compressed point $R$ on Edwards25519, and (ii) an MPI $s$ in the range $[0, \ell-1]$, where $\ell$ is the group-order. Each part of the signature has a length of 32 bytes and is given in little-Endian format. The public key must be given in affine coordinates and must not have a low order. The provision of the public key as an affine point speeds up signature verification since the public key does not need to be decompressed, which saves an exponentiation in the underlying prime field GF($p$). Therefore, this function is preferable to `ed25519_verify` when several signatures from the same signer are to be verified. 

The return value is `0` when the signature is valid, and non-0 otherwise. Possible non-0 return values are `ERR_INVALID_POINT` (when the public key does not satisfy the curve equation or has a low order) and `ERR_INVALID_SIGNATURE` (when the verification failed for some other reason).
