# X25519 Key Exchange

X25519 is an efficient, robust, and easy-to-use key-exchange protocol specified in [RFC 7748](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7748). It uses a Montgomery curve known as Curve25519 and involves only the $x$-coordinate of elliptic-curve points in the computation of the shared secret. A major benefit of X25519 compared to ECDH based on NIST curves is its robustness against subtle implementation flaws and accidental API misuse. Thanks to the Montgomery curve and the underlying pseudo-Mersenne prime field, X25519 is also easier to protect against side-channel attacks, especially timing attacks. X25519 has enjoyed growing popularity over the past 10 years and is nowadays supported by a wide range of cryptographic libraries, among which [LibSodium](https://doc.libsodium.org) and [Lib25519](https://lib25519.cr.yp.to) are probably the most well-known examples in C.

From a high-level perspective, X25519 key exchange consists of the following two functions: (i) a function to generate a key-pair on Curve25519, and (ii) a function to get a shared secret using one's own private key and the other party's public key. Micro25519 provides these two functions in essentially the same way as Lib25519. The API of LibSodium is slightly different but can be emulated through a simple wrapper. Apart from the two main functions, Micro25519 also comes with some auxiliary functions that are useful for key exchange, e.g., one to generate pseudo-random bytes deterministically from a log-term secret and a nonce, and one to obtain a secret key suitable for symmetric cryptosystems from an X25519 output. 

These two auxiliary functions are based on a hash function, namely SHA-512 (i.e., the same hash function that the Ed25519 signature scheme uses). Micro25519 supports SHA-512 through two APIs, a low-level API consisting of three functions following the _Init-Update-Final_ model, and a high-level API with a single function that computes the digest in one go. This high-level function is simply a wrapper around the low-level functions. The low-level API is useful for constrained devices as it allows for an incremental hashing of large messages in small(er) parts, without having to store the entire message in RAM. 

### Data structures

Most inputs and outputs of the functions provided by the X25519 API are _byte-arrays_, i.e., arrays of type `unsigned char`. For brevity, Micro25519 defines the data type `Byte` as alternative for `unsigned char`. A private key (i.e., a scalar) is simply a Multi-Precision Integer (MPI) and a public key (i.e., an $x$-coordinate of a point on Curve25519) is nothing else than an element of the underlying prime field GF($p$). Both are stored in arrays of type `Word` (i.e., arrays of type `uint32_t`), which have a fixed length of 8 for Curve25519 (see [mpiarith.md](./mpiarith.md) and [gfparith.md](./gfparith.md)). Internally, the X25519 functions also use the C structures `Point` to represent a point on an elliptic curve and `ECDomPar` to access the domain parameters and pre-computed constants needed for X25519 (see [moncurve.md](./moncurve.md)).

The SHA-512 implementation that comes with Micro25519 defines the following C structure for the hash context, which contains all the information necessary to describe the current state of the hash function, including the current digest.

```
typedef struct sha512_ctx {
  uint64_t hdig[8];   // current (i.e., intermediate) hash digest
  uint64_t mbuf[16];  // buffer for a 128-byte block of the message
  size_t length;      // overall length of hashed message (in bits) 
  int mbytes;         // number of bytes contained in mbuf-array
} SHA512Ctx;
```

A pointer to such a `SHA512Ctx` structure is passed as a parameter to the three love-level SHA-512 functions to enable an incremental (i.e., multi-step) computation of the digest of a large message split up into smaller parts. The implementation of the high-level function to compute a SHA-512 digest uses a `SHA512Ctx` structure internally.


### Initialization of a SHA-512 context

```
void sha512_init(SHA512Ctx *ctx);
```

This function initializes a `SHA512Ctx` structure, making it ready for the processing of data.


### Update of a SHA-512 context with data

```
void sha512_update(SHA512Ctx *ctx, const Byte *data, size_t dlen);
```

This function updates a `SHA512Ctx` structure by processing `dlen` bytes of data. The `SHA512Ctx` structure must be initialized before data can be processed.


### Finalization of a SHA-512 context to obtain the digest

```
void sha512_final(SHA512Ctx *ctx, Byte *digest);
```

This function performs the final operations (e.g., padding) that are necessary to obtain the SHA-512 digest (i.e., hash value).

The byte-array `digest` for the digest must be able to accommodate 64 bytes.


### Computation of the SHA-512 digest of data

```
void sha512_hash(Byte *digest, const Byte *data, size_t dlen);
```

This function computes the SHA-512 digest (i.e., hash value) of `dlen` bytes of data.

The byte-array `digest` for the digest must be able to accommodate 64 bytes.


### Generation of 32 bytes of (pseudo-)random data

```
int x25519_rand_bytes(Byte *rbytes, const Byte *ltsec, const Byte *nonce, size_t nlen);
```

This function generates 32 bytes of (pseudo-)random data using either the random-number generator of the operating system (resp., platform SDK) or deterministically from a 32-byte long-term secret and a nonce. However, both the long-term secret and the nonce are optional, i.e., this function can be called with the `NULL` pointer for `ltsec` and `nonce`. If a long-term secret is provided, it will be used to generate 32 bytes of pseudo-random data deterministically by hashing it together with a nonce, which is generated on the device if `nonce` is `NULL`. The long-term secret must have high entropy but does not need to be generated on the device (i.e., it can be generated off-device using a true random number generator and stored in flash memory prior to deployment). The nonce, if provided, must be unique and have a length between 8 and 16 bytes, i.e., `nlen` must be either 0 or in the range $[8,16]$. Ideally, the nonce is unpredictable (similar to an initialization vector in symmetric encryption when using the CBC mode of operation) and immediately deleted after its use.

The byte-array `rbytes` for the output must be able to accommodate 32 bytes. The return value is `0` when the generation of 32 (pseudo-)random bytes succeeded and `ERR_RAND_BYTE_GEN` otherwise.


### Generation of an X25519 key-pair

```
int x25519_gen_keypair(Byte *privkey, Byte *pubkey);
```

This function generates a key-pair for X25519 consisting of a private key (i.e., a scalar $l$) and a public key (i.e., the $x$-coorinate of a point $R$ on Curve25519). The private key is generated using `x25519_rand_bytes` and "pruned" as described in Section 5 of RFC 7748. The point $R$ is the result of a fixed-base scalar multiplication of $l$ by the generator $G$ of Curve25519 (i.e., $R = l \cdot G$).

The byte-arrays `privkey` and `pubkey` for the private key and public key must each be able to accommodate 32 bytes. Both keys are stored in little-Endian format. The return value is `0` when the key-pair generation succeeded, and non-0 otherwise. Possible non-0 return values are `ERR_RAND_BYTE_GEN` (when the generation of random bytes failed) and `ERR_INVALID_POINT` (when $R$ is the point at infinity).


### Computation of an X25519 shared secret

```
int x25519_shared_sec(Byte *sharedsec, const Byte *privkey, const Byte *pubkey);
```

This function computes a shared secret using one's own private key (i.e., a scalar $k$) and the other party's public key (i.e., the $x$-coodinates of a point $P$ on Curve25519) as input. Each key has a length of 32 bytes and is given in little-Endian format. The private key must be "pruned" as described in Section 5 of RFC 7748. Furthermore, the point $P$ must not have a low order (i.e., $\mathrm{ord}(P) > 8$) to help prevent certain kinds of side-channel attack. The shared secret is the $x$-coordinate of the result of a variable-base scalar multiplication of $l$ by the point $P$ (i.e., $R = k \cdot P$).

The byte-array `sharedsec` for the shared secret must be able to accommodate 32 bytes. Like the keys, the shared secret is stored in little-Endian format. The return value is `0` when all inputs and the result are valid, and non-0 otherwise. Possible non-0 return values are `ERR_INVALID_SCALAR` (when the scalar $k = 0$) and `ERR_INVALID_POINT` (when $P$ has low order or $R$ is the point at infinity).


### Computation of a secret key for symmetric cryptosystems

```
void x25519_gen_symkey(Byte *seckey, const Byte *sharedsec, const Byte *pubkey1, const Byte *pubkey2);
```

This function computes a 32-byte secret key suitable for symmetric cryptosystems from an X25519 shared secret and the public keys that were exchanged between the two parties. The shared secret and each public key have a length of 32 bytes and are given in little-Endian format. Note that both parties need to use the same order for the two public keys, since the secret key is obtained by hashing all three inputs.

The byte-array `seckey` for the secret key must be able to accommodate 32 bytes. Like the shared secret and the public keys, the secret key is stored in little-Endian format.
